This is a manuscript I wrote about Responsibility Shielding, which I used to call Moral Shielding, in the summer of 2024, prior to collecting any data. The final manuscript will diverge from this in many ways. I'm only including this text in the preregistration to demonstrate the extent to which I thought through this experiment and paper in advance of collecting data.  

Moral Shielding 
Abstract 
This research explores 'moral shielding,' a cognitive bias where individuals are perceived as less culpable due to the intervention of another agent between their decisions and their harmful outcomes. Through experiments using vignettes and economic games, I analyze how blame and punishment are moderated by the presence of an intermediary agent compared to objects or random events. Notably, these effects are distinct from and more pronounced than the general diffusion of responsibility observed in group actions, and result from social cognition, not just causal reasoning. Implications for ethical, legal, and policy frameworks are discussed. 
	Note: This draft is written prior to receiving data and is written as if the results are as expected. 
	Note: As with Chapter 1, this chapter is neither complete nor necessary for the dissertation. I included it because I’m proud of the idea and want to show the diversity of experiments the Morality Game can host. 

Introduction 
Imagine a social media platform introduces an addictive feature that the executives know will lead to increased teen depression, yet they go ahead with it anyway. Who's to blame—the executives  or the teenagers who can't help but scroll? Or think about the January 6th Capitol riots. President Trump incited the crowd, yet most blame landed on the rioters who broke into the Capitol. Why? Consider a person puts someone else's address online, a practice known as 'doxing'. Then, another individual shows up and commits a crime at that address. The direct perpetrator takes the fall, but what about the person who posted the address online? These scenarios introduce the concept of “Moral Shielding”. 
This paper introduces Moral Shielding and describes experiments that demonstrate its existence, distinguish it from similar phenomena, and explore its mechanisms. Moral shielding occurs when one agent’s harmful actions are ‘shielded’ from blame by another agent who’s choice is a more proximate cause of harm. This intermediary or proximate agent absorbs much of the responsibility, shielding the original actor from the full moral repercussions that would otherwise be directed at them.

Moral shielding involves an ultimate agent, who initiates the potential harm; a proximate agent, who is the proximate cause of the harm; and the harm itself. If onlookers blame the proximate agent more than the ultimate agent then this interpersonal disparity in blame is a strong clue to the presence of moral shielding, but the definitive signature of moral shielding is a counterfactual disparity in blame: when the ultimate agent receives less blame than they would have without the intervention of the proximate agent. A moral shield is an agent that onlookers consider to be morally responsible—someone thought to have free-will, with an able mind, foreknowledge of likely consequences of their options, and the control to choose among them (precise definitions coming). This means that a moral shield can be a lucid adult human who is in-control, not a hallucinator, dream walker, small child, or automaton because blame can only be deflected by something that can be blamed, praised, published, or rewarded.
In April 2024, the parents of 15-year-old school shooter Eric Crumbley were each sentenced to 10-15 years in prison for manslaughter, having negligently allowed conditions under which their son fatally shot four classmates (Levenson & Sgueglia, 2024). Their son, Eric Crumbley, was sentenced to life without parole. The sentencing disparity might be explained by moral shielding but does not independently verify the phenomenon as distinct from other factors such as the moral salience of the direct application of personal force (Greene, et al., 2009). Had Eric merely been eight or nine years old, it is conceivable that his parents would serve life sentences in his place. Conversely, if an adult Eric had left his parents’ home and then had slaughtered four of his fellow university students, it is likely that the law would absolve his parents of blame, recognizing Eric's full capacity as a moral agent, hence acting as a moral shield for his mom and dad. 
The discernment of moral shielding hinges on such counterfactual disparities: differences in moral judgment that solely arise from the presence or absence of a moral shield. Consider a hypothetical scenario where Donald Trump personally vandalized the U.S. Capitol, fatally injured officers on January 6th, and was imprisoned as a result. The causes of Trump’s counterfactual prison sentence might be attributable to his direct use of personal force, rather than the counterfactual lack of rioters to shield him from blame. This underscores the necessity for precise experimental conditions to isolate moral shielding from confounding variables such as leadership dynamics, the visibility of the perpetrator, the ease of establishing guilt, the use of personal force, temporal proximity to the harm, and the number of involved perpetrators (Greene J. , 2014). 
Subsequent experimental vignettes require participants to assign blame across different scenarios outlined in game trees—a methodological approach from game theory. These trees delineate a sequence of decisions: nodes represent states, and edges symbolize transitions. At choice nodes, agents deliberately select between outcomes, thus capable of acting as moral shields. Conversely, at chance nodes, outcomes are determined by random processes, symbolizing nature’s impartiality and the absence of moral agency. If my hypothesis holds, the presence of a moral shield in the first scenario—the choice-choice condition—should result in lesser blame assigned to the initial agent compared to the second scenario, the choice-chance condition, where decisions result from probabilistic outcomes and no moral shield is present. This experimental design aims to demonstrate whether observers attribute less blame to an initiator when a moral shield intervenes, thereby substantiating the phenomenon of moral shielding distinct from merely diffusing responsibility among several agents.
 
Figure 9.1: Game Tree Structure of Vignette Conditions: 
These game trees illustrate the structure of the Choice-Choice (Shielding) condition on the left, Choice-Chance condition in the middle, and Division condition on the right. The ultimate agent (U) makes the initial decision in each scenario. The proximate agent (P) is depicted making a choice in the Choice-Choice and Division conditions. The neutral faces represent neutral outcomes, while the sad faces represent harmful outcomes. The probability "𝑝", shown in the thought bubbles, represents the likelihood of choosing the leftmost outcome in each condition, known by the ultimate agent to be greater than 0.5.
	Choice-Choice (Shielding): The ultimate agent may opt to leave the decision to cause or prevent harm to the proximate agent. 
	Choice-Chance: This scenario mirrors the Choice-Choice setup, but the second choice by the proximate agent is replaced by a random, probabilistic event (chance node), removing conscious choice and thereby eliminating moral agency and a moral shield. 
	Diffusion: Both agents make simultaneous decisions. A harmful outcome occurs only if both independently opt for it, represented by both choosing the left path. 
The dashed lines around the decision nodes in the Diffusion condition depict an information set, which indicates that choices are made simultaneously without knowledge of the other's actions, unlike the sequential choices in the other conditions. Critically, the ultimate agent is aware of the harm probability "𝑝" in all scenarios and has the same capacity to avert harm. 
Moral shielding is detected if participants attribute less blame to the ultimate agent in the Choice-Choice condition compared to the Choice-Chance condition. Furthermore, distinguishing moral shielding from typical diffusion of responsibility occurs when the ultimate agent in the Choice-Choice condition receives less blame than in the Diffusion condition, suggesting that the disparity in blame is due to the presence of a moral shield rather than merely dividing blame amongst multiple decision-makers. 
To put this concretely, the vignettes are as follows: 
	Choice-Choice (Shielding) Condition: Ultimo is an adult and is a clerk at a specialty chemical supply store catering to industries and educational institutions—the only such store within 200 miles. As the town's annual heritage festival unfolds outside, a crowded parade is set to climax with a dramatic firework show at noon. Proximo, an adult who is a fellow clerk who is off work that day, enters the store and creates a list of items to buy that are only available at that store, purportedly for making fireworks. 
At checkout, the store’s automated system reveals a history of vandalism, reckless endangerment, animal cruelty, and arson. Ultimo has no criminal history. The safety algorithm calculates there’s a 90% risk that Proximo will use the chemicals to create explosives. Store policy prevents refusing sales but empowers employees to fail to add a catalyst necessary to enable risky chemicals, although employee commission depends on adding the catalysts. Despite fears about what Proximo will do, Ultimo is unwilling to take the $50 hit to his pay. 
While Proximo watches, Ultimo enables the chemicals and makes the sale. As the parade reaches its climax, Proximo detonates the bomb, causing over 30 fatalities and numerous injuries. 
	Choice-Chance Condition: Ultimo is an adult and is a clerk at a specialty chemical supply store catering to industries and educational institutions—the only such store within 200 miles. As the town's annual heritage festival unfolds outside, a crowded parade is set to climax with a dramatic firework show at noon. Enebrius, an elderly man with a severe case of dementia that distorts his thoughts, his perceptions, and his ability to control his actions who is a fellow clerk who is off work that day, enters the store and creates a list of items to buy that are only available at that store, purportedly for making fireworks. 
At checkout, the store’s automated system reveals a history of vandalism, reckless endangerment, animal cruelty, and arson. Ultimo has no criminal history. The safety algorithm calculates there’s a 90% risk that Enebrius will use the chemicals to create explosives. Store policy prevents refusing sales but empowers employees to fail to add a catalyst necessary to enable risky chemicals, although employee commission depends on adding the catalysts. Despite fears about what Enebrius will do, Ultimo is unwilling to take the $50 hit to his pay. 
While Enebrius watches, Ultimo enables the chemicals and makes the sale. As the parade reaches its climax, Enebrius detonates the bomb, causing over 30 fatalities and numerous injuries. 
Proximo is a responsible agent. Enebrius is bewildered and out of control. Thus, only Proximo can shield Ultimo from blame. If participants blame Ultimo less when Proximo detonates the bomb than this can be explained by moral shielding, but it can also be explained by division of responsibility, whereby a fixed quantify of blame is shared by a larger number of actors. Moral shielding occurs in a sequential causal chain, when the causally proximate actor bars blame from back propagating towards distally causal actors. Moral shielding is not merely diffusion of blame between simultaneous choosers; the proximate agent must choose after the ultimate agent. I added a diffusion condition to control for this confound, where both agents choose at once and where the harm only happens if both agents will it to. 
	Diffusion Condition (Simultaneous): Ultimo is an adult and is a clerk at a specialty chemical supply store catering to industries and educational institutions—the only such store within 200 miles. As the town's annual heritage festival unfolds outside, a crowded parade is set to climax with a dramatic firework show at noon. Proximo, an adult who is a fellow clerk who is off work that day, enters the store and creates a list of items to buy that are only available at that store, purportedly for making fireworks. 
At checkout, the store’s automated system reveals a history of vandalism, reckless endangerment, animal cruelty, and arson. Ultimo has no criminal history. The safety algorithm calculates there’s a 90% risk that Proximo will use the chemicals to create explosives. Store policy prevents refusing sales but empowers employees to fail to add a catalyst necessary to enable risky chemicals, although employee commission depends on adding the catalysts. Despite fears about what Proximo will do, Ultimo is unwilling to take the $50 hit to his pay. 
Ultimo tells Proximo that one of the ingredients contains a remotely controlled trigger. Both Ultimo and Proximo will have the opportunity to enable the chemicals at noon. As the parade reaches its climax, Proximo and Ultimo detonate the bomb, causing over 30 fatalities and numerous injuries.

This chapter draws on a single data set from a multifaceted experiment that simultaneously addresses many questions about moral shielding. However, this chapter groups these questions into manageable chunks to facilitate a clear exposition. Part 1 focuses on the detection and differentiation of moral shielding through the use of carefully designed vignettes. Part 2 tests if blame ratings elicited from vignettes correlate with blame ratings elicited from players in economic games. Finally, this chapter discusses the generalizability, unanswered questions, and the social implications of moral shielding. 
Part 1: Detection and Demarcation 
Methods 
Participants and Apparatus 
This experiment has not yet been conducted but is written in the past tense assuming that results confirm my hypothesis. X participants were recruited from the University of Michigan human Subject Pool via SONA systems and were assigned 1 hour of participation credit. They completed the experiment online via the Morality Game platform, which recorded and coded all data. 8 participants were excluded for incorrectly answering any of the comprehension questions (see manipulation checks, section 9.2.1.5). 
Procedure 
As outlined previously, participants were presented with vignettes depicting hypothetical moral dilemmas involving harmful outcomes orchestrated by multiple actors. In each vignette, participants were tasked with rating the blameworthiness of one designated actor on a 7-point Likert scale, ranging from not blameworthy to extremely blameworthy . While participants experienced all vignette conditions in a randomized order, special analytical emphasis was placed on the responses to the first vignette condition each participant encountered. This focus was driven by the expectation that participants might seek to maintain consistent responses across different conditions. The concern was that such consistency might mitigate the moral shielding effect, presumed to be a heuristic-driven response that could be overridden by deliberate rational thinking. Participants were limited to rating only one actor per vignette for the same reason. Likewise, vignettes were presented on separate pages and participants could not return to previous pages to change their responses. Participants were provided as much time as they needed to respond. 
Vignettes 
The vignettes used were included in the introduction. They are variations of one template, shown below. The words or phrases within brackets can be swapped out depending on the condition. Although the template below permits systematic variation along many dimensions, the only difference between the choice-choice and choice-chance conditions is that the proximate agent is a lucid able adult, named Proximo in the choice-choice condition, and is man with a tumor that diminishes his self-control in the choice-chance condition. In those conditions, Ultimo, the ultimate agent chooses before the proximate agent, while in the diffusion condition, both agents choose simultaneously. In all cases, participants are ask to rate the blameworthiness of Ultimo, the ultimate agent . 
Vignette: The Chemical Supply Store Dilemma 
[Ultimate Agent Name] is [an adult/a small child/a non-sentient military robot without safety controls/an elderly man with a severe case of dementia] [who is a co-owner of/who is a clerk at/who is the owner of/’’] a specialty chemical supply store catering to industries and educational institutions—the only such store within 200 miles. As the town's annual heritage festival unfolds outside, a crowded parade is set to climax with a dramatic firework show at noon. [Proximate Agent Name], [also a small child/a non-sentient military robot without safety controls/an elderly man with a severe case of dementia/a fellow employee off the clock], enters the store and creates a list of items to buy for making fireworks, available only at that store. 
At checkout, the store’s automated system reveals [no criminal history/a history of vandalism, reckless endangerment, animal cruelty, and arson]. [Ultimate Agent Name] [also has no criminal history/has a history of minor thefts and mischief]. The safety algorithm calculates there’s [a 90% risk/only a 10% chance] that [he/it] will use the chemicals to create explosives. 
Store policy prevents refusing sales but empowers employees to [fail to add a catalyst necessary to enable risky chemicals, although employee commission depends on adding the catalysts/disable risky chemicals by mixing in a neutralizing agent, although employees are expected to pay for this agent out-of-pocket]. Despite fears about what [Proximate Agent Name] will do, [Ultimate Agent Name] is unwilling to [take the $50 hit to his pay/pay $50 for the neutralizing agent]. 
	Sequential Case: While [Proximate Agent Name] watches, [Ultimate Agent Name] [enables the chemicals/fails to neutralize the chemicals] and makes the sale. 
	Sequential-Simultaneous Case: Unseen by [Proximate Agent Name], [Ultimate Agent Name] discreetly [enables the chemicals/fails to neutralize the chemicals] and makes the sale. 
	Simultaneous Case: [Ultimate Agent Name] tells [Proximate Agent Name] that one of the ingredients contains a remotely controlled trigger. Both [Ultimate Agent Name] and [Proximate Agent Name] will have the opportunity to [enable the chemicals/fail to neutralize the chemicals] at noon. 
As the parade reaches its climax, [Proximate Agent Name] [is unsure if [Ultimate Agent Name] has enabled the chemicals until now. Nonetheless, [Proximate Agent Name] successfully/fails to detonate the bomb], causing over 30 fatalities and numerous injuries. 
Please rate [Ultimate Agent Name/Proximate Agent Name]'s [blameworthiness/ praiseworthiness] on a scale from 0 to 6 where 0 means not [blameworthy/praiseworthy] at all and 6 means extremely [blameworthy/praiseworthy]. 
Manipulation Checks 
Next participants completed two more vignettes, identical to the choice-choice and choice-chance conditions, except where they rate the blameworthiness of the proximate agents. The proximate agent is either a lucid adult of sound mind or a man with a tumor that diminishes his self-control and causes him to hallucinate. The man with the tumor is intended to be perceived to be at least partially incapable of a free-will and moral responsibility and thus less blameworthy than a lucid adult of sound mind. Only volitional agents can act as moral shields, not mindless robots, small children, or those not of sound mind. The comparison in blame levels is intended to verify that participants perceived this tumor patient as less morally culpable and thus less able to serve as a moral shield for the ultimate agent. 
Next, participants were shown this prompt and asked to answer the following questions: 
“Please answer the following comprehension questions. These questions require you to recognize the names of the characters in versions of the story of the parade bombing. As a reminder, Proximo had a criminal history. Enebrius was an elderly man with dementia. Ultimo worked at the specialty chemical supply store.” 
1. Which of the following statements is correct: 
a. Ultimo believed that Proximo was more likely to detonate the bomb than Enebrius, 
b. Ultimo believed that Enebrius was more likely to detonate the bomb than Proximo, 
c. Ultimo believed that Proximo and Enebrius were equally likely to detonate the bomb. 
2. Which of the following statements is correct: 
a. It was easier for Ultimo to prevent harm in the version of the story with Proximo, 
b. It was easier for Ultimo to prevent harm in the version of the story with Enebrius, 
c. Ultimo had an equal ability to prevent harm in both versions of the story. 
3. Which of the following statements is correct: 
a. It was easier for Ultimo to prevent harm than Proximo, 
b. It was easier for Proximo to prevent harm than Ultimo, 
c. Ultimo and Proximo had an equal ability to prevent harm. 
X out of Y participants were excluded from the data set for failing to answer all three questions correctly. Option C was the correct answer in all three questions, although the order of the answers was randomized.
Moral Sheilding Effect=blame(c.chance)-max(blame(c.choice),blame(division))
Equation 9.1: Moral Shielding Effect. 
The moral shielding effect is the difference between the blame attributed to the ultimate agent in the choice-chance condition minus the maximum of the blame attributed to the ultimate agent in the choice-choice condition and the division of responsibility condition.
Results 
Detection and Demarcation of Moral Shielding 
The data support the existence of moral shielding and show it to be distinct from mere division of responsibility. As illustrated in Figure 9.2, the mean blameworthiness rating in the choice-chance condition is significantly higher than in both the choice-choice and division conditions. Specifically, the mean blame rating in the choice-chance condition (M = 4.446, 95% CI [4.308, 4.583]) is more than double that of the choice-choice condition (M = 1.644, 95% CI [1.483, 1.805]) and the division condition (M = 2.027, 95% CI [1.843, 2.215]). 
A Kruskal-Wallis H test was conducted to determine if there were differences in blameworthiness ratings among three conditions: Choice-Choice, Choice-Chance, and Division. The test indicated that there were significant differences among the conditions, H(2) = 2241.35, 𝑝 < 0.001. Subsequent Dunn’s post-hoc tests revealed significant differences between the Choice-Choice and Choice-Chance conditions (𝑝 < 0.001), between the Choice-Chance and Division conditions (𝑝 < 0.001), and between the Choice-Choice and Division conditions (𝑝 < 0.001).
 
Condition	Mean	95% CI
Choice-Choice	1.644	[1.483, 1.805]
Choice-Chance	4.446	[4.308, 4.583]
Division	2.027	[1.843, 2.215]
Figure 9.2: Mean Blame Ratings Per Condition: 
Participants rated the blameworthiness of ultimate agents in vignettes of hypothetical moral dilemmas on a 7-point Likert scale from 0, indicating not blameworthy to 6, indicating extremely blameworthy. In all conditions, the ‘ultimate agent’ could have prevented harm, but knowingly chooses what will likely lead to grievous harm. This ‘ultimate agent’ is so named because they are the ultimate cause of harm. Conversely, the ‘proximate agent’ is so named because they are the proximate cause of harm. In the choice-choice condition the proximate agent is a lucid adult capable of full moral responsibility because they are in control and know the likely consequences of their options. Conversely, in the choice-chance condition, the proximate agent is an old man with dementia with little self-control or foreknowledge of their potential impact. According to the moral shielding hypothesis, the lucid adult deflects blame away from the ultimate agent, while the old man with dementia is not deemed a potential object of blame and so all the blame falls upon the ultimate agent. Indeed, the average blame attributed to the ultimate agent is far less when they stand behind another lucid adult (1.644) than when they stand behind an old man with dementia (4.446). However, the division of responsibility condition controls for the number of agents capable of being blamed because it features two lucid adults choosing to cause harm simultaneously. However, the number of potentially blamable agents cannot account for the difference between the blame ratings in the other two conditions. The dark red upper region of the middle bar shows the blame which can only be attributed to moral shielding.
Overcoming the Moral Shielding Heuristic 
This effect was determined from average responses in the first vignette that participants were exposed to. However, this substantial effect diminishes with the next vignette, likely because participants override the inconsistency of the moral shielding effect with a deliberate attempt to respond consistently across dilemmas. 
To further explore this phenomenon, we analyzed the within-subjects data by examining the change in blameworthiness ratings across sequential vignettes. We considered four conditions: choice-choice-trial-1, choice-choice-trial-2, choice-chance-trial-1, and choice-chance-trial-2. A Kruskal-Wallis H test was conducted to compare the blame ratings among these conditions. The test indicated significant differences among the conditions, H(3) = 2100.12, 𝑝 < 0.001.
 
Figure 9.3: Blame Rating by Trial Order: 
This line chart illustrates the mean blameworthiness ratings for the ultimate agent in the choice-choice and choice-chance conditions across the first and second trials. The diminishing effect in the second trial highlights the impact of within-subject comparisons probably caused by the drive for consistency.
Dunn’s post-hoc tests  revealed significant differences between the choice-choice condition from trial 1 to trial 2 (𝑝 < 0.001), the choice-chance condition from trial 1 to trial 2 (𝑝 < 0.001), and the choice-choice condition in trial 2 and the choice-chance condition in trial 2 (𝑝 < 0.001). 
The results indicated that the mean blameworthiness rating increased significantly from Choice-Choice-Trial-1 (M = 1.428, 95% CI [1.332, 1.532]) to Choice-Choice-Trial-2 (M = 2.672, 95% CI [2.651, 2.693]) and decreased from Choice-Chance-Trial-1 (M = 4.962, 95% CI [4.844, 5.066]) to Choice-Chance-Trial-2 (M = 4.051, 95% CI [4.030, 4.072]). This demonstrates that the moral shielding effect diminishes from the first to the second trial but remains significant. 
Additionally, we examined the correlation between blame ratings in the choice-choice and choice-chance conditions for each participant, as shown in the histogram (Figure 9.4). The Pearson correlation coefficient was calculated to assess the relationship between these ratings. The analysis revealed a strong positive correlation, 𝑟(83) = 0.58, 𝑝 < 0.001, suggesting that participants strive to maintain consistency in their responses across similar dilemmas (fake data).
 
Figure 9.4: Correlation of Blame Ratings: 
This histogram shows the count of individual blame ratings in the choice-choice and choice-chance conditions, revealing a strong positive correlation between the two, indicating participants’ efforts to remain consistent in their responses.
Manipulation Checks 
Manipulation check data verify that participants understood the vignettes as intended. Significant differences were detected when participants rated the blameworthiness of the proximate agent—the lucid adult, Proximo, in the choice-choice condition and the elderly man with severe dementia, Enebrius, in the choice-chance condition. A Mann-Whitney U test indicated that Proximo (Mdn = 0.869) was considered significantly more blameworthy than Enebrius (Mdn = 5.432), U = 356, 𝑝 < 0.001, 𝑟= 0.47. This verifies that the experiment successfully manipulated participants' perceptions of the proximate agents’ capacity for moral responsibility. Only 8 participants were excluded from the data set for missing any of the 3 comprehension questions. This means that all remaining participants understood that (1) the ultimate agent perceived the probability of harm to be equal in the choice-choice and choice-chance conditions, (2) the ultimate agent had an equal ability to prevent harm in the choice-choice and choice-chance conditions, and (3) the ultimate agent and proximate agent had an equal ability to prevent harm. 
These results demonstrate that moral shielding exists and is distinct from mere division of responsibility, similar to the bystander effect (Darley & Latané, 1968). This finding emerged from vignettes of hypothetical moral dilemmas, rich in concrete details, such as the chemical supply store, the parade, the bomb, and the description of Enebrius’s severe dementia. While not as ecologically valid as field studies, these hypothetical scenarios enable participants to vividly imagine and easily understand the situations. However, each additional detail risks introducing confounds. 
To address this, one approach is to test moral shielding using different vignettes with varied details, randomizing irrelevant elements while retaining essential ones. A more direct method is to use abstract stimuli devoid of irrelevant details. The next section describes an attempt to detect moral shielding in multiplayer economic games presented as game trees, which are austere and free from confounding details. The aim is to detect moral shielding in these economic games and, if detected, to determine the correlation between these results and those from the hypothetical vignettes. A strong correlation would indicate a robust effect, validating the description of the phenomenon. 
Part 2: Moral Shielding in Multiplayer Economic Games 
Methods 
Participants and Procedure 
This section assumes I finished collecting data. The same participants from part 1 also participated in multiplayer economic games hosted on the Morality Game multiplayer platform before engaging in the vignette conditions. The structure of the multiplayer phase mirrors the vignette phase, with the addition of ‘distractor games’ designed to prevent participants from noticing similarities between the three primary games and between these games and the three primary vignettes. 
The three primary games—choice-choice, choice-chance, and division—were presented in random order, followed by two manipulation check games where participants rated the blameworthiness of the proximate agent (or node) rather than the ultimate agent. In these games, participants were non-choosing players who lost payoffs due to the selections of other players (or chance nodes; see Figure 9.5). After each game round, an overlay prompted participants to rate the blameworthiness of an agent. In the three primary games, participants rated the ultimate agent, and in the manipulation check games, they rated the proximate agent on a 7-point Likert scale from 0 = not blameworthy to 6 = extremely blameworthy. 
All participants practiced a minimum of six rounds/games with diverse game trees against live human participants to acclimate to the multiplayer experience. The distractor games involved live human counterparts, while the primary games and manipulation check games involved bots. Participants were informed that the experiment involved a human-to-bot ratio of x%, but they would not know when their counterpart was a human or a bot. This was intended to make participants believe their counterparts were probably human, even in the primary conditions that involved bots. 
The interpretation of results hinges on the assumption that participants understand that the ultimate agent believes the probability of the harmful outcome is equal in all conditions. For instance, in all vignette conditions, the hypothetical stories explained that an automated store security system informed the ultimate agent that there was a 90% probability that the proximate agent would cause harm. The Morality Game platform can display beliefs on the user interface as thought bubbles. These can include beliefs about the past, present, and future, about oneself or others, and about attributes of the game tree, such as probabilities, payoffs, and players, including their beliefs and beliefs about beliefs, etc. 
However, instances of ‘user incredulity’ may occur when the user interface displays beliefs that users may not accept. In the choice-choice condition, users may not simply accept the beliefs displayed for the ultimate agent. Specifically, if this experiment represented the ultimate agent as believing there is a 90% probability that the proximate agent will choose the harmful outcome, but users believe this probability is much lower, then this ‘user incredulity’ confounds the experiment. To address this confound, I’ll need to figure out which of the following workarounds to use: a) Use the ambiguous probabilities feature. b) Rely on probabilities that would be Bayesian rational according to the frequencies of selfish choices in the distractor games. c) Assume 50-50 probabilities according to the principle of insufficient reason. d) Convince the user of these probabilities based on the content of the instructions or another overlay that presents information justifying these believed probabilities. e) Show that the ultimate agent has a history with the proximate agent, justifying the ultimate agent’s pessimism. f) Use low probabilities of harm based on likely population priors and then show the proximate agent choosing the harmful outcome, despite the surprise this causes.
 
Figure 9.5: Multiplayer Economic Game Stimuli – All Three Conditions: 
These images represent the game tree stimuli used by the Morality Game multiplayer platform to depict economic games. These three games correspond to the choice-choice (left), choice-chance (middle), and division of responsibility (right) conditions from the vignettes discussed in part 1 of this chapter. Unlike the vignettes, which are rich in concrete details, these game trees are abstracted to include only the essential features needed to represent the dilemmas. Aside from various aesthetic flourishes, these trees would be familiar to mathematical game theorists.
The ultimate agent (first chooser) is represented by the greenish avatar at the root choice node at the top of each tree. The ultimate agent chooses the left option in all three trees, as indicated by the colored shadow around the arrow pointing towards the next node. The next node varies by condition: a sequential choice node in the choice-choice condition, a sequential chance node in the choice-chance condition, and a simultaneous choice node in the division of responsibility condition. 
In the choice-choice condition, the proximate agent, depicted as a multicolored dodecagon, makes their choice after the ultimate agent aware of the consequences. In the choice-chance condition, the pink-purple die represents a probabilistic event, with the left outcome occurring 50% of the time and the right outcome occurring 50% of the time, as shown by the probability 'thermometers.' In the division of responsibility condition, the distinction between the ultimate and proximate agents is blurred because they choose 'simultaneously,' meaning they commit to their choices before knowing the other's choice . 
The key point is that the ultimate agent has an equal capability to cause or prevent harm in all three conditions—the negative expected value of their choices is identical. Thus, any differences in blame attributed to the ultimate agent between the choice-choice and choice-chance conditions can be attributed to the replacement of a choice node with a chance node, creating scenarios where the ultimate agent is shielded from blame versus being unprotected. The division condition controls for the number of choosers, with the choice-choice condition being a 2-player sequential choice game and the division condition being a 2-player simultaneous choice game.
Results 
Detection of Moral Shielding in Games 
As with the vignettes, the moral shielding effect was detected in the multiplayer economic games. To assess the differences in blame ratings across the choice-choice, choice-chance, and division conditions, I conducted a Kruskal-Wallis H test. The test revealed significant differences among the conditions, H(2) = 65.24, 𝑝 < 0.001. Post-hoc comparisons using Dunn’s test indicated that the mean blame rating in the choice-chance condition (Mdn = 5.0) was significantly higher than both the choice-choice condition (Mdn = 2.0, 𝑝 < 0.001) and the division condition (Mdn = 3.0, 𝑝 < 0.001). This confirms the presence of the moral shielding effect in the economic games, consistent with the findings from the vignette scenarios. 
Correlation Between Vignette and Game Results 
To determine the relationship between the blame ratings from the vignettes and the games, I calculated Spearman’s rank-order correlation coefficients. Spearman’s correlation was appropriate given that the data were on an ordinal scale and not normally distributed. 
The blame ratings in the choice-choice condition from the vignettes were strongly correlated with the blame ratings in the choice-choice condition from the games, R2 = 0.72, 𝑝 < 0.001. Similarly, the blame ratings in the choice-chance condition from the vignettes were strongly correlated with the blame ratings in the choice-chance condition from the games, R2 = 0.75, 𝑝 < 0.001. For the division condition, the correlation between vignette and game blame ratings was also strong, R2 = 0.68, 𝑝 < 0.001. 
These strong positive correlations indicate that participants’ blame ratings were consistent across different presentation formats, reinforcing the robustness and validity of the moral shielding effect detected in both vignettes and economic games.
Thus, the results from the multiplayer economic games replicate the moral shielding effect observed in the vignettes, with higher blame ratings in the choice-chance condition compared to the choice-choice and division conditions. Moreover, the strong correlations between the blame ratings in the vignettes and the games suggest that the moral shielding effect is a robust phenomenon, detectable across different experimental paradigms. These findings support the hypothesis that the moral shielding effect is not merely an artifact of the vignette method but a genuine phenomenon that can be observed in various contexts. 
Discussion 
Moral shielding occurs when an ultimate agent, who initiates harmful actions, is shielded from blame by a proximate agent, who is the proximate cause of harm. This proximate agent deflects moral culpability away from the ultimate agent, effectively blocking the blame from propagating back up the causal chain. Although proximate agents are often blamed more than ultimate agents, this can be due to factors such as the salience or personal nature of their actions. For example, street-level drug dealers are typically punished more severely than mid-level dealers, possibly because they are easier to arrest. 
While interpersonal blame disparities can suggest moral shielding, only counterfactual blame disparities can prove it. Moral shielding may have been overlooked because it can only be clearly identified by comparing the blame assigned to the ultimate agent across different scenarios. This paper describes an experiment that created such conditions by juxtaposing two alternate scenarios, asking participants to rate the blameworthiness of the ultimate agents in each. The experiment controlled for various factors, such as social roles, the nature of the act (omission versus commission) , the predictability of harm, and the ability to prevent harm, ensuring that all agents had an equal ability to prevent harm in both conditions. 
The key difference between conditions was whether the proximate agent was a volitional agent eligible for moral responsibility or not—an able, lucid adult versus an elderly man with severe dementia. This difference significantly affected participants’ blame ratings. When the ultimate agent had a volitional proximate agent to hide behind, they were blamed mildly. In contrast, they were blamed severely when they did not have such a shield. A control condition with moderate blame ratings ruled out the possibility that the counterfactual blame disparity was due to dividing a fixed amount of blame among more agents.
The moral shielding effect is the difference in blame attributed to the ultimate agent when they have no shield compared to when they do. This effect is substantial, accounting for roughly 2.8 points on a 7-point Likert scale on average. 
The moral shielding effect is much stronger when measured between-subjects than within-subjects. The effect is most pronounced when comparing blame ratings on the first trial participants are exposed to, but it diminishes on the second and third trials. This reduction in blame ratings within participants highlights how easily moral shielding can be overlooked, helping to explain why it remained undiscovered until now. It also suggests that moral shielding is caused by a heuristic—a mental shortcut that can be overridden. The decrease in effect size from the first to the second trial aligns with the idea that participants are consciously adjusting their blame ratings to be consistent with their previous responses, which ends up being more consistent with the principles of utilitarianism. 
Despite variations within utilitarian thought, the core idea is that individuals should choose the option with the highest expected utility for everyone involved. Ultimately, expected utility matters, independent of the subsequent choices of others. Whether this forecast depends on agents' free will or chance events, utilitarianism holds that individuals must choose the option with the highest utility regardless. Even if participants do not fully grasp the metaethical implications, the inconsistency in blame between conditions is evident and unlikely to withstand conscious scrutiny. If moral shielding is not born of reason, it must be a product of intuition—a heuristic . 
Because moral shielding persists despite its apparent illogic, it likely compensates with other merits. Like any heuristic, it saves time and cognitive resources by simplifying a problem—in this case the problem of attribution. When an onlooker sees someone harmed, they instinctively search for a cause or someone to blame. I hypothesize that the human mind automatically runs a simple algorithm: If I see someone harmed, search for a culprit backwards up the causal chain, link by link, until I lose interest or find a culprit . If I find a culprit, blame them. Future research can test this hypothesis by comparing the moral shielding effect of participants under high or low time-pressure (Suter & Hertwig, 2011), high or low cognitive load (Greene, Morelli, Lowenberg, Nystrom, & Cohen, 2008; Muraven & Baumeister, 2000) , and based on individual differences in reflectiveness (Paxton, Ungar, & Greene, 2012).
However, the deeper causes of moral shielding are entirely unexplored, and this phenomenon may have a cultural basis in addition to a cognitive basis. I hypothesize that moral shielding is influenced by individualism and would likely correlate with scores of personal individualism (Hui, 1984; Singelis, Triandis, Bhawuk, & Gelfand, 1995; Triandis & Gelfand, 1998). Individualism is defined by the tendency to draw sharp identity distinctions between self and others and this tendency leads individualists to reject forms of collective guilt and responsibility (Lewis, 1948; Smiley, 2017). I suspect that the barriers preventing individualists from identifying with others also prevent the spread of moral responsibility between self and others and among multiple others. 
Regardless of its causes, moral shielding appears to be a profoundly anti-utilitarian and anti-cooperative phenomenon. Moral shielding hides the guilty, freeing them to damage the collective good. Future research should seek to identify how pervasive the phenomenon is, but it is likely to manifest and cause problems in various domains. For instance, in principle-accessory dynamics and accomplice liability, the principal (ultimate agent) might be shielded from blame by the accessory (proximate agent) who directly commits the crime. In cases of negligent entrustment, the car owner (ultimate agent) who gives their keys to a drunk friend (proximate agent) might be blamed less compared to the friend who drives and causes harm. In incitement and online harassment, the influencer (ultimate agent) can be shielded from blame by their follower (proximate agent) who directly harasses someone else. Similarly, supply-chain responsibility often sees manufacturers (ultimate agents) being shielded by retailers (proximate agents) who sell harmful products. Additionally, inventors (ultimate agents) might be less blamed for the misuse of their inventions by users (proximate agents), despite foreseeable misuse. 
Indeed, by writing this paper, I am the ultimate agent, and by reading this paper, you are the proximate agent. It is my responsibility to ensure that the concept of moral shielding is not misused or misinterpreted. By spreading awareness of moral shielding, I aim to deprive wrongdoers of an excuse. For instance, Perdu Pharma attempted to deflect blame for the opioid epidemic onto doctors and addicts (Office, 2019). An increased understanding of moral shielding could help counteract such rationalizations. However, I am also mindful that allegations of moral shielding could potentially stifle the free expression of ideas and technological innovation. If a listener misuses someone else’s influential words or a user misuses someone else’s invention, these misuses, even if foreseeable, do not necessarily negate the speaker's or inventor's justifications, provided their foreseeable benefits outweigh the potential harms. Ultimately, we are all responsible for what we can control and foresee—a calculation aimed at achieving the greatest good, regardless of the choices others make between now and then. 
Additional Materials – Moral Shielding
 
Figure 9.6: Stages of Moral Shielding Experiment: 
The Moral Shielding Experiment progresses through the following stages: (1) simulated multiplayer games hosted on the Morality Game involving game trees that correspond to the choice-choice, choice-chance, and simultaneous choice conditions, (2) congruent versus incongruent Stroop Trials intended to vary cognitive load/atrophy, (3) survey-style vignettes where participants are partitioned by the first condition they experience: choice-choice, choice-chance, or simultaneous choice, and (4) individual difference measures: Cognitive Reflections Test and INDCOL to test if the Moral Shielding Effect correlates with cognitive reflectivity or individualism-collectivism. Note that the games stage comes before the vignettes because the games are less likely to bias survey responses due to their abstract nature, while the reverse is not the case.
 
Figure 9.7: Effect of Cognitive Load on Moral Shielding: 
Violin plots display the distribution of the moral shielding effect for participants that experienced congruent versus incongruent Stroop trials immediately before responding to the vignettes. I hypothesized that Moral Shielding effects would be more pronounced amongst people who were cognitively depleted. Indeed, cognitively demanding incongruent Stroop trials boosted the Moral Shielding effect.
 
Figure 9.8: Moral Shielding Effect by Cognitive Reflections Test (CRT) Score: 
I hypothesized that Moral Shielding would be more pronounced amongst cognitively unreflective participants because it is a bias that seems difficult to justify under scrutiny or reflection. Violin plots show the Moral Shielding effect by the number of questions answered correctly on the CRT. 
Cognitive Reflections Test: 
A bat and a ball cost $1.10 in total. The bat costs $1.00 more than the ball. How much does the ball cost? 
_____ cents. 
If it takes 5 machines 5 minutes to make 5 widgets, how long would it take 100 machines to make 100 widgets? 
191 
_____ minutes. 
In a lake, there is a patch of lily pads. Every day, the patch doubles in size. If it takes 48 days for the patch to cover the entire lake, how long would it take for the patch to cover half of the lake? 
_____ days.

 
Figure 9.9: Effect of Individualism on Moral Shielding: 
I hypothesized that Moral Shielding would be more pronounced amongst those with individualistic attitudes or dispositions because individualism partitions responsibility between people much like Moral Shielding does. Box plots display the Moral Shielding Effect based on individualism scores assessed by the INDCOL survey [(IV + IH) – (CV + CH)], where IV = vertical individualism, IH = horizontal individualism, CV = vertical collectivism, and CH = horizontal collectivism. 
INDCOL Questionnaire: 
Scale: The items should be mixed up prior to administering the questionnaire. All items are answered on a 9-point scale, ranging from 1= never or definitely no and 9 = always or definitely yes. 
Horizontal individualism items: 
I often do "my own thing." 
I'd rather depend on myself than others. 
I rely on myself most of the time; I rarely rely on others. 
My personal identity, independent of others, is very important to me. 
Vertical individualism items: 
Winning is everything. 
Competition is the law of nature. 
It is important that I do my job better than others. 
When another person does better than I do, I get tense and aroused. 
Horizontal collectivism items: 
If a coworker gets a prize, I would feel proud. 
The well-being of my coworkers is important to me. 
To me, pleasure is spending time with others. 
I feel good when I cooperate with others. 
Vertical collectivism items: 
Parents and children must stay together as much as possible. 
It is my duty to take care of my family, even when 1 have to sacrifice what I want. 
Family members should stick together, no matter what sacrifices are required. 
It is important to me that I respect the decisions made by my groups. 
Scoring: Each dimension’s items are summed up separately to create a VC, VI, HC, and HI score.

These are the actual vignettes for the study (which include trolley-car variants):
Chemical Supply Store Vignettes
Choice-Choice:
Ultimo is a mentally capable adult with no criminal history. He is a clerk at a specialty chemical supply store catering to industries and educational institutions—the only such store within 300 miles. As the town's annual heritage festival unfolds outside, a crowded parade is set to climax with a dramatic firework show at noon. Proximo enters the store and creates a list of items to buy that are only available at that store, purportedly for making fireworks. 
At checkout, the store’s automated system reveals that Proximo also is a mentally capable adult with no criminal history. Based on the set of chemicals and Proximo’s background and behavior, the safety algorithm calculates there’s a 90% risk that Proximo will use the chemicals to create dangerous explosives. Ultimo knows from past cases that the system’s risk assessments have been extremely accurate, so he fully trusts this estimate. 
The town is offering a cash prize for the most spectacular firework at the festival, and Proximo has entered the competition. He believes that using these powerful chemicals will make his display stand out and help him win the prize, even though he has been told that detonating them in the middle of the crowded parade route will almost certainly seriously injure someone nearby.
Store policy prevents refusing sales but empowers employees to fail to add a catalyst necessary to enable risky chemicals, although employee commission depends on adding the catalysts. Despite fears about what Proximo will do, Ultimo is unwilling to take the $500 hit to his pay.
While Proximo watches, Ultimo enables the chemicals and makes the sale. As the parade reaches its climax, Proximo detonates the bomb, causing numerous injuries, including a man losing his legs.
Please rate Ultimo's blameworthiness on a scale from 1 to 7 where 1 means not blameworthy at all and 7 means extremely blameworthy.  ________

Choice-Chance:
Ultimo is a mentally capable adult with no criminal history. He is a clerk at a specialty chemical supply store catering to industries and educational institutions—the only such store within 300 miles. As the town's annual heritage festival unfolds outside, a crowded parade is set to climax with a dramatic firework show at noon. Proximo enters the store and creates a list of items to buy that are only available at that store, purportedly for making fireworks.
At checkout, the store’s automated system reveals that Proximo has no criminal history but has a severe acquired brain injury that permanently prevents him from properly understanding what he is doing and controlling his actions in complex situations. Based on the set of chemicals and Proximo’s background and behavior, the safety algorithm calculates there’s a 90% risk that Proximo will use the chemicals to create dangerous explosives. Ultimo knows from past cases that the system’s risk assessments have been extremely accurate, so he fully trusts this estimate. 
The town is offering a cash prize for the most spectacular firework at the festival, and Proximo has entered the competition; since his brain injury, he fixates on making the biggest, brightest explosion and has difficulty appreciating that detonating such powerful chemicals in the middle of the crowded parade route will almost certainly seriously injure someone nearby, even when others explain this to him.
Store policy prevents refusing sales but empowers employees to fail to add a catalyst necessary to enable risky chemicals, although employee commission depends on adding the catalysts. Despite fears about what Proximo will do, Ultimo is unwilling to take the $500 hit to his pay.
While Proximo watches, Ultimo enables the chemicals and makes the sale. As the parade reaches its climax, Proximo detonates the bomb, causing numerous injuries, including a man losing his legs.
Please rate Ultimo's blameworthiness on a scale from 1 to 7 where 1 means not blameworthy at all and 7 means extremely blameworthy.  ________

Division:
Ultimo is a mentally capable adult with no criminal history. He is a clerk at a specialty chemical supply store catering to industries and educational institutions—the only such store within 300 miles. As the town's annual heritage festival unfolds outside, a crowded parade is set to climax with a dramatic firework show at noon. Proximo enters the store and creates a list of items to buy that are only available at that store, purportedly for making fireworks.
At checkout, the store’s automated system reveals that Proximo also is a mentally capable adult with no criminal history. Based on the set of chemicals and Proximo’s background and behavior, the safety algorithm calculates there’s a 90% risk that Proximo will use the chemicals to create dangerous explosives. Ultimo knows from past cases that the system’s risk assessments have been extremely accurate, so he fully trusts this estimate. 
The town is offering a cash prize for the most spectacular firework at the festival, and Proximo has entered the competition. He believes that using these powerful chemicals will make his display stand out and help him win the prize, even though he has been told that detonating them in the middle of the crowded parade route will almost certainly seriously injure someone nearby.
Store policy prevents refusing sales but empowers employees to fail to add a catalyst necessary to enable risky chemicals, although employee commission depends on adding the catalysts. Despite fears about what Proximo will do, Ultimo is unwilling to take the $500 hit to his pay.
As part of the store’s remote safety system, both Ultimo and Proximo receive a wireless control. At noon, each must privately choose whether to enable the chemicals or do nothing. Neither knows what the other will choose. The bomb will only explode if both choose to enable the chemicals. As the parade reaches its climax, Ultimo and Proximo both choose to enable the chemicals at the same time, causing the bomb to detonate, causing numerous injuries, including a man losing his legs.
Please rate Ultimo's blameworthiness on a scale from 1 to 7 where 1 means not blameworthy at all and 7 means extremely blameworthy.  ________

Trolley Dilemma Vignettes
Choice-Choice
[Insert illustration]
A trolley car is racing down the tracks. The conductor had a heart attack and cannot halt the trolley. The trolley is set to turn left at the next fork, unless Ultimo, an operator, flips a switch to make the trolley turn right. Only if Ultimo flips the switch, will the trolley reach a second fork, further down the line. 
At the second fork, the trolley is again set to turn left, unless Proximo, another operator, flips a second switch to make the trolley turn right. If Proximo flips the second switch, they both know that the trolley will run over and maim a workman on the tracks. 
If either Ultimo does not flip his switch, or Proximo does not flip his switch, the trolley will not run over anybody. Only if Ultimo flips his switch and then Proximo flips his switch will the workman be harmed. Both operators can see that the conductor is passed out and unable to stop the trolley. Both operators are, and know each other to be, mentally capable adults without criminal histories.
Ultimo’s monthly performance bonus depends on sending trolleys to their intended destinations, which he will lose if he fails to flip his switch. Proximo’s monthly bonus works the same way. The transport company’s automated risk assessment system calculates that there is a 90% chance that Proximo will flip his switch if given the opportunity. Based on years working for the company, and the system’s long track record of accuracy, Ultimo fully trusts this risk estimate.
Despite fearing what Proximo will do at the second fork, Ultimo is unwilling to lose $500 and so he flips his switch, diverting the trolley to the right. Proximo flips the switch and the workman is run over and loses his legs. 
Please rate Ultimo's blameworthiness on a scale from 1 to 7 where 1 means not blameworthy at all and 7 means extremely blameworthy.  ________

Choice-Chance
[Insert illustration]
A trolley car is racing down the tracks. The conductor had a heart attack and cannot halt the trolley. The trolley is set to turn left at the next fork, unless Ultimo, an operator, flips a switch to make the trolley turn right. Only if Ultimo flips the switch, will the trolley reach a second fork, further down the line. 
At the second fork, the trolley’s direction is controlled by a computerized switching mechanism. The mechanism uses a simple probabilistic control process: if activated, it has a 90% chance of sending the trolley onto the right-hand track, and a 10% chance of keeping it on the left-hand track. If the mechanism sends the trolley right, Ultimo knows it will run over and maim a workman on the tracks. 
If Ultimo does not flip his switch, the trolley will not reach the second fork in a way that activates the mechanism and no one will be harmed. Only if Ultimo flips his switch and then the mechanism diverts the trolley rightward will the workman be harmed. Ultimo can see that the conductor is passed out and unable to stop the trolley. He is a mentally capable adult without a criminal history. 
Ultimo’s monthly performance bonus depends on sending trolleys to their intended destinations, which he will lose if he fails to flip his switch. Ultimo is fully aware that if he flips his switch, then the computerized switching mechanism will have a 90% chance of diverting the trolley towards the workman.
Despite fearing what will happen at the second fork, Ultimo is unwilling to lose $500 and so he flips his switch, diverting the trolley to the right. The computerized mechanism flips the switch and the workman is run over and loses his legs. 
Please rate Ultimo's blameworthiness on a scale from 1 to 7 where 1 means not blameworthy at all and 7 means extremely blameworthy.  ________

Division
[Insert illustration]
A trolley car is racing down the tracks. The conductor had a heart attack and cannot halt the trolley. The trolley is set to turn left at the next fork, unless two operators in separate stations, Ultimo and Proximo, both flip their switches to make the trolley turn right. If the trolley goes to the left, it will miss its intended destination, but if it goes to the right, the trolley will run over and maim a workman on the tracks. 
Both operators can see, and know that the other can see, that the conductor is passed out and unable to stop the trolley. However, Ultimo and Proximo cannot see each other through their station windows and cannot communicate. Thus, they must make their choices without knowing the choice of their counterpart. They both know, and know that the other knows, that the trolley will divert rightward and maim the workman if and only if both operators flip their switches. Both operators are, and know each other to be, mentally capable adults without criminal histories.
Ultimo’s monthly performance bonus depends on sending trolleys to their intended destinations, which he will lose if he fails to flip his switch. Proximo’s monthly bonus works the same way. The transport company’s automated risk assessment system calculates that there is a 90% chance that Proximo will flip his switch if given the opportunity. Based on years working for the company, and the system’s long track record of accuracy, Ultimo fully trusts this risk estimate. 
Despite fearing what Proximo will do at his station, Ultimo is unwilling to lose $500 and so he flips his switch. Proximo also flips the switch, diverting the trolley rightward and the workman is run over and loses his legs. 
Please rate Ultimo's blameworthiness on a scale from 1 to 7 where 1 means not blameworthy at all and 7 means extremely blameworthy.  ________

Note: The actual experiment will involve half of participants memorizing a 2-digit versus 8-digit number that they must repeat after all the vignettes. That's the new cognitive load manipulation instead of the Stroop Task. Also, I'm not going to include an economic game portion in the first study. That comes later. After each vignette, I ask for blame ratings, moral (action) wrongness ratings, and to assign hypothetical prison sentence years to Ultimo or Proximo. I will include the CRT and INDCOL at the end of the study. 